Okay everyone, we are going to start our afternoon sessions.
So please take your seats.
I feel bad ending all of your amazing conversations, but I have to.
So we are now entering the more kind of, it's not more interesting, but we're entering the
phase of our conference where we're going to go into phase two.
We've been in phase one for the last three panels.
And now we're in phase two, because we're repeating the subject matters that we've been
talking about, but with unique participants for each round table.
And so the participants, you'll be seeing in this panel the next one and then tomorrow
morning, we're all going to be talking about the same stuff, but from new points of view,
evolving the same dialogue together, but with new things added in.
So I wanted to just plant this for you guys, because we had a very nice kind of segue from
last panel to this one.
Eric from the last panel mentioned that one way we could think about mending the relationship
between science and society and art and society is to think instead about how science and
art could work together, become stronger partners, and then that would have a trickle down effect
into society.
And I think that's a really nice idea.
But this speaks directly to science art collaboration and in the ways that we can improve collaboration,
that collaboration to be a more regular thing, identify the problems that we're having with
collaboration, maybe it's about jargon like we were just talking about.
So I want to kind of plant that as a way for you guys to start out this, because I think
it really ties together nicely.
Zach is going to come up and introduce all the panelists, so please raise your hand when
he says your name.
Daniel Cone.
Daniel is co-founder of the VISG group and was the founding artist in residence at the
Broad Institute for Genomic Research.
He currently serves as an artist in residence at the center for epigenomic research at Albert
Einstein College of Medicine and manages a variety of other projects.
Edgar Chueery.
Oh.
Edgar is a professor and director of Princeton's program in engineering physics and director
of Princeton's electric propulsion and plasma dynamics laboratory.
Tega Brain.
Tega is an artist and an environmental engineer whose work intersects ecology, engineering
and the politics of emerging technologies.
She's a fellow at data and society and is an assistant professor of digital media at NYU.
Karen Ingram.
Karen is a creative director, designer, artist and author, as well as a synthetic biology
leap fellow.
She is also a co-organizer of the Empiersis League, a science cabaret based in Brooklyn.
He's a filmmaker and biologist whose interdisciplinary work aims at transforming the way science
is communicated to the public through film and visual arts.
His work has been featured in the New York Times, Forbes, Nature and Ted to name a few.
Patricia Olenick.
Patricia's work explores art, science and technology related themes that often examine
the dialect of natural and artificial and cognition and effect.
She also co-directs the New York laser program in New York and is a former chair of the Leonardo
education and art forum.
Let's begin the round table.
Okay, so whoever wants to jump in on how do we improve upon science art collaborations?
I think each and every one of you engages in science art collaborations either in your
own work with yourself because you have dual degrees or with other people.
I'm looking at you, Patricia.
Okay, well.
Go ahead, Patricia.
Thanks.
Patricia.
Well, you know, it's something that I think a lot about.
What are the kinds of structures and scaffolding that support, you know, dialogue between artists,
scientists and humanists and writers and anybody who wants to be part of that, people who
are interested in technology.
And there are, I guess, a couple of observations that I would make over the years having done
this in different kinds of forums.
So when I was introduced as the co-director of the New York laser program, which we do
out of Elin Levy studio, Elin Levy is my co-director on that, we very purposely actually
don't record any of our sessions because we're trying to keep the conversations as a kind
of testing ground.
And we think that, well, from our observation that people have been a little bit more hesitant
to speak up, which of course, if you're not really speaking up and you're really digging
deep and you're really maybe saying something that you don't want to have on record, this
can really inhibit, actually recording can actually really inhibit a kind of more exploratory
kind of set of conversations.
But something that I was struck by with even some of Elizabeth Demore's comments.
I'm quite institutionalized as a person at this point.
I really need the research institution to do my work.
I need the maker facilities.
I need, it's a kind of context.
Now, within that context, there are many different ways to structure it.
And I think the University of Michigan, which was already mentioned here today once, actually
has some very interesting programs that give rise to the kinds of situations that then
grow the essential questions that we need to be asking ourselves around these collaborations.
A lot of those situations involve agnostic spaces.
And so I'm a big fan of the agnostic space.
The idea behind the agnostic space is that it's owned by nobody, but it serves everyone.
So when technology or programs aren't growing as nodes off of existing programs, but rather
they're coming from the provost level, and they're not really owned by anybody, but they
serve everyone, then I find that the different disciplines tend to come together a little
bit easier because the questions grow out of essential issues that are pertinent to everybody
sitting at the table.
So I guess I would start by saying that the structure that brings together art science
and technology, that the structure itself can fundamentally shape the kinds of conversations
that emerge.
Daniel.
Giving the eyes.
I fell into art science or into this dialogue.
I met a geneticist or he wrote to me and whatever we started a discussion.
I realized that a lot of questions I had about my readings in physics, which I would give
physics for the light person and physics and philosophy that probably a lot of us have
read, and whether I could better understand some of those ideas that I found difficult
to understand by engaging with this geneticist, and maybe that genetics was sort of poised
to be the physics of the 21st century in terms of this role in society.
But I also, I think I rushed into that breach because I've always been very uncomfortable
in the art world, and I, excuse me, for all the artists in the room, but I often get bored
with talking to other artists because we end up talking about the materiality of our practices
in ways that are, you know, our galleries and if we're lucky, our pigments, and if we're
really lucky, we might give each other critiques, but rarely.
And I found that when I engage with scientists, we had none of that in common, and so the
only things we could actually talk about were the meta structures, the things that are common
to all of us, which are the culture in which we are and the kinds of inquiries we're interested
in.
So I've often positioned myself sort of as an outsider to a lot of places, and I think,
so one of the things that I kind of spent a lot of time talking to you all last night
as I was having a hard time sleeping, but one of the things that really came up was the
role of failure in trying to collaborate and the role of madness, and I often found myself
as a sole artist in an institution of which grew to 1500 people, the Broad Institute,
that I never knew if I was totally crazy or a visionary or an idiot, you know, like it
was very hard to understand what my position was, and so I think there are, there's something
that would be interesting to talk about is the role of the ways in which in the different
communities we're part of, we have methods for validation for the kinds of knowledge
that we produce, and as we move between disciplines, those kind of break down, and so I'm sort
of curious with other people around the table, but also in the room in terms of your experiences
and your ideas for solutions, how do we start to build communal mechanisms for locating
ourselves, so whether they be ways of sort of creating a map of the art science activities
that happen in different cities, there's something I've been really interested in doing in New
York, but I feel like we need to find mechanisms to understand our relative positions, like
at one point I think two or three years after I was at the Broad, I found this book that
David Edwards had written about called Art Science in the Post-Google Generation or something
like that, and it was the first time I read something, I thought I was kind of crazy and
on the fringe, and I read something that gave me a context for understanding what I might
be involved in, and the idea that I might have had this intuitive leap, and it might take
ten years to realize it in any way, and to have a few stories was really, really profoundly
useful, and I think that's, a lot of us are wondering as we make these leaps, like am
I crazy, or why am I doing this, and there's actually an emergent moment where a lot of
us are doing it, and I'm just curious, what are the mechanisms we have to understand that
it's actually, you know, like, I often see my ideas on other people's faces, you know,
like, people are constantly using my ideas, they're not my ideas, you know, they're the
emergent ideas, and so I'm curious how to, that's my question sort of for the space
of collaboration, how do we, because it's actually very hard to, I've found, I usually
say I've spent 15 years failing at collaborating, and I think to some degree it's really true,
but there have been really creative failures, I have a whole body of work that came out
of it, and I've really engaged with scientists in very interesting ways, in ways that, which
I think were bi-directional, so I guess that's one thing I'd like to throw out, and the other
one is, I know this is an art science space, or conference, but the thing that always comes
up for me is, that's just one axis that we have chosen to explore, because we are either
artists or scientists, but what to me is really interesting is this intro, whether you call
it trans or intro, or this space in between all of our disciplines, which allow us to
pose questions differently and come out of our, we know we've talked, everybody has kind
of talked about the space, and is that what are the advantages of keeping that an art
science collaborative space, and what are the disadvantages, or what might we gain by allowing
anthropologists of science into the room, or historians, or economists, or how does the
discussion around the table change as you kind of release those boundaries completely?
I'll stop for now.
Yeah, I just want to kind of go on, they said you have space, so I'm a geneticist, actually
just to go off what Daniel will say, I'm a geneticist with parents that are both artists,
my dad's a painter, and my mom's a filmmaker, and I did my PhD at Rockefeller, and I was
very interested, basically, that during my training as a PhD, as a scientist, I found
that the space and being in a laboratory really enabled me to think about artistic endeavors,
and it was actually that experience that brought me into the world of filmmaking, so now it's
hard to define, and it's hard to hear yourself being defined in a certain way as a, I guess,
I'm a biologist, retired at a young age and became a filmmaker, but I was working on
vision, I was working on fruit flies first in Michael Young's lab that just received a
Nobel Prize, and then went on to the stellar lab at Rockefeller, and I found that actually
the work that I was doing was very amenable to narratives and to kind of engaging with
artists, and I guess for me, being in that context is what led me to actually make that
leap, although I would oftentimes not call it a leap because I feel that a lot of people
when you're being interviewed or discuss your journey, everybody always says, you know,
how did you transition from one field to the other, but I never, I don't think about it
that way, I think about it as kind of a natural progression from being a geneticist to now
being a filmmaker and still focused and thinking about those same ideas about how to, you know,
how to visualize science, how to create stories about science, and things that pertain as
much to the research world as they do to the film world, and I find that there's a lot
of similarities between those worlds.
In terms of the importance of the institution in enabling the work, most of what I did started
as a PhD student, I was able to start a film series that Rockefeller and bring scientists
and you know, Paul Nurse and many people to really engage in how they thought about science
and media and especially in film, and I had a particular interest in fiction actually,
in thinking about the portrayal of science and scientists and how to create films that
were about accurate science, compelling science, but also told stories, and this is a little
bit the mission of the Sloan Foundation that was mentioned over the last few days, but
it was that environment that led me to create and to make my first films, but then I left
that institutional world and I created my own nonprofit organization, which is a film
festival that happens here in New York called Imagine Science, and that just celebrated
its 10th year that started at Rockefeller 10 years ago.
Now what I find myself doing is with this institution we go back to universities and
the universities have become the venues in which we actually show the films and my career
as a filmmaker I find that the academic institutions and the conferences that I used to attend
as a graduate student are the places that received me and you know, where I used to have a poster
you know in the middle of like a Hilton lobby I find myself going back there and showing
my film and it's been a real thrill to be able to go back and kind of repurpose these
spaces that are used for scientific talks and conferences and go back there with artistic
projects which I think are happening and we can probably talk about that a little bit
more over the next hour.
So I guess that's my experience has been that I've left the academic world to go back to
it and now I teach at NYU and I find myself kind of interfacing with those worlds but
there was a step where in which I had to kind of push myself out of there.
But I will say that speaking about this overall art science collaborations and I remember
yesterday there was a talk about do artists and a scientist is the exchange mutual I would
say that it's important not to necessarily refer to it as a switch or as a leap but I
find that those two worlds are very similar in processes and you know and every scientist
has an artistic kind of chord in them so I think it's kind of trying to find that middle
ground between those two worlds and it's not always necessarily about the collaborative
process but it's also about what you know what you're trying to in my case it's a lot
about the narrative and the story that I want to say and then based on that I'll engage
with different types of artists and visual scientists and filmmakers and use these different artistic
approaches to answer a question as I would answer in a science lab.
We're going round.
Well my background is environmental engineering and I worked for a number of years in Australia
in this field and you know spent a lot of time doing open design developing stormwater
and water infrastructures in the context of cities and new housing developments and I
got really frustrated with working in this industry and also like coming through an engineering
education where there was not a lot of opportunities to ask questions about the narratives that
are driving these fields, politics, who is funding research, why we frame technologies
through this like solutionism perspective and through stories as if like technology is going
to solve these problems which are inherently political, social, economic and this is something
that you know I think in the US is you know amplified in an insane way right now by the
Silicon Valley and I feel like for me the reason why I now primarily work as an artist
but also as an academic so I also teach a lot of media arts and computational arts at NYU.
So what motivated me to leave the field of engineering and like explore these technologies
and these these you know ways of engaging with the world but from artistic context and
the context of galleries and so forth is because I didn't find a space for that in my work
as an engineer and in engineering education I think this is something that is hugely problematic.
So I guess I'm going to speak to this more from a perspective of practices that are sort
of in between engineering, design, art, I mean we like use a lot of labels I don't know if
it matters so much what you want to call it but I do think there's like you know I do
think in terms of some of the really really thorny problems we're facing that it's so
critical that we find ways to get a better language for you know the culture and political
context in which technologies are developed and the agendas which they serve.
So my work attempts to address this it's often like public experiments online or it often
involves participation for example one of my recent works is sort of like a public demonstration
of how fitness trackers fail and how you can spoof them and how you can author your own
fitness data so that you can take advantage of insurance discounts and health discounts
and all of these things that are available to you and so this project is about telling
a story about how these technologies are representing like they have an agenda and how that they
can fail right and that you know an everyday person can kind of try to reverse engineer
and understand you know what does a step look like from the point of view of a tracker
and therefore what is this story about trackers being representative of health like it's
such a narrow view of what health is right that serves the insurance industry that is
promoting this.
So these you know exist as a website as if we use the language of the Silicon Valley
to kind of invite people into thinking critically about data thinking critically about what
it means to quantify the body quantify health in this way what's left out right who is left
out in this in these sorts of situations.
Other work recently that I did just to give some sort of context what I'm saying takes
a series is a smell based dating service right so we actually my collaborator is here over
sitting over there but we launched a service that allowed people to sign up we had a few
hundred people sign up in New York City and asked each to wear a t-shirt for three days
and send us back their shirts and then they all got ten samples anonymous samples randomly
from the group from which they then chose who they would like to meet based on the smell
of the body odor and our website would then connect to you via email if there was a mutual
match between the participants and yes people went on dates and yes relationships did come
out of it but you know the project really did provoke an extraordinary conversation about
the role of smell in attraction but also provoked this really extraordinary response
from the press in terms of you know smell dating is the next big thing in dating you
know we can extract value from body odor we can quantify it you know we can optimize dating
in this way that really kind of revealed to me the narrative again that you know through
which technologies is kind of deployed but for me that was really interesting so we did
talk to a lot of scientists it wasn't really a collaboration the scientists were kind of
like well we can't really get involved with that because we don't know who knows what's
going to happen but they were it was fabulous because they did really encourage us to you
know we were like should we instruct our participants not to smoke not to eat garlic whatever and
they were like no you do like let people do what they want right that's part of the data
in your in your body odor so it was really a way of inviting a public to questions that
are unresolved in that field right and so people could then see for themselves we got
lots of emails from you know straight men who were like I matched with all men what does
that mean and we were like I don't know why you're asking me like maybe you need to think
about that right so there was lots of uncertainty and humor and obviously questions raised rather
than questions answered I think so yeah well that's a great thing for art to do it's raised
questions yeah exactly and I think for me it's about prodding for asking questions of what's
missing what assumptions are being made like science totally emerges from a from a social
context from a culture and I think art can really like I think as artists we are trained
to kind of look at the stories being told and why certain assumptions being made and so
I think in all fields it's about realizing that science doesn't have this monopoly on
the production of knowledge right and it can take many different forms in terms of collaboration
I think the challenge is you know most of us are like in institutional departments where
if I talk to a science my research is really legible to how their research is assessed
and vice versa I find in the US actually this is a little bit better because research metrics
seem to be a little bit more flexible in Australia but it's I think it's a massive challenge
because it means that collaborations like we're talking about today aren't really legible
to the mechanisms or the institutions that support them so I think we all need to be
trying to reshape our institutions and and make a space and make a metric for actually
supporting this work.
So yeah it's just kind of summing up in my mind we all pretty much agree that having
an institution behind you well maybe difficult to work with and their silos are actually
very helpful that's where the money is oftentimes the money also could come from a scientific
organization doing science outreach stuff that's pretty much where it's at we all agree we
kind of need a neutral space to collaborate whether that space is virtual or physical
there needs to be something neutral about it.
Really interesting your point about not having things recorded maybe a collaborative space
needs to be a safe space in that way where people do feel is freedom.
Yesterday we were talking about types of collaborations a taxonomy of collaborations which is an interesting
idea to think about kind of the potentials of it but I'm wondering from you guys what
are in Mark Ross and spoke to this a little bit but what are the things which make collaborations
you know successful in the way that when we look forward to our futures what do we hope
the future of collaboration looks like is it always going to look like it looks right
now or how can we make it look better.
When we talk about the space to collaborate it might be interesting to consider how we
can enhance opportunities to connect first and I think heard from people who spoke so
far some wonderful examples of interfaces between how things you know evolved.
I would like to answer your original question by starting with a given example the thought
experiment okay.
Even all humans can see color between only green and yellow that's it you cannot see
anything else most likely what your eyes will show you also white because your septus
in your eye will mix the colors and give you white and black if there's no color so you
see white, yellow, green and black that's it and we evolve that way and that's what we
can see.
And then one day I invited to my lab and I give you a pair of goggles put them on and
bang you see the dark color spectrum everything color red blue violet everything around us.
As an artist it's just if you are an artist who put those goggles on it might completely
open up your world.
What I would like to say is that there are actually many such goggles today all around
the world some of which are weak salt which open up which to a scientist and I'm speaking
as a physicist I have no clue what can they expire in an artist.
There's a disconnect there's a latency when these and I'm not talking about technology
only I think a lot of you were talking mostly about technology which I think is a wonderful
interface between I'm also technologist and I believe in technology but I'm talking about
the ability of science to provide tools that open up your perception as an artist that
most artists are not aware of because there's also disconnect between the two communities
that Daniel touched on you know artists talk about galleries and leaders and scientists
talk about journals and as graduate students so there's a disconnect.
So I think one of the questions I'd like to propose is to find ways for these interfaces
to exist so people can see those goggles.
One way which I don't see much of at all as someone who has to go to conferences all
the time New York City for example is known for its galleries and wonderful theaters and
so on but people forget that on a short week in New York City there are at least 12 scientific
conferences being held you know here.
The tops scientific societies hold the conferences here.
I've never seen an artist in my conference my physics conferences even in New York City.
Why not bring people or have the institution level first you will have the American Physical
Society for example with NEA or collaborate on some event that will bring the two together
where first just wandering around scientific conferences an artist and they're quite often
specially talks they might not understand at all but there are sometimes technologies
or imagine a microscope.
This is another example of seeing scale that before cannot be seen.
There are when an artist took to a microscope sees complete different world an abstracted
world which can inspire him or her and that those tools can be seen at conferences.
They are quite often not only actual tools but ideas.
Of course there is a disconnect in terms of the convention you have to know mathematics
you have to know physics to appreciate details but sometimes that disconnect is actually
advantageous because you see the aesthetic aspect of exposure.
So what I'm suggesting is that should be more institutionalized proactive bringing together
of people because the latency between the time when an idea and science comes in and
sometimes decades before an artist picks up on it.
To accelerate this I think and also I encourage a proactive attitude on the individual level.
Artists really skip going to these conferences and there's some dread involved but the only
thing you show you is not as much of the dread of some physicists I know going into gallery
in Chelsea trying to make sense of what's going on in the walls.
So it takes going over that hill and once you do I think the whole world opens up.
Well it seems to me you essentially have done that experiment.
No.
But to the Broad Institute as an artist you've done that experiment so what would you say
was the outcome of having more colors added to your vision.
So I see the world a little differently than that.
I think as artists we're trained to think about representation and I come from I'm
French American I was born in India and sort of Jewish but not religious I grew up in France.
So for me there was always meaning was always context dependent and so and I think a lot
of artists think about the world in that way that they are aware of the tools they use
and the representational systems that they use and so when I went to the Broad I was
curious about what are the tools that we use today in science.
What does the space of science look like and I wasn't so much interested in painting
cells or neurons or double helices but I was interested in you know for example reading
about physics you know strength theorists talk about maybe there are 10 dimensions but
they're curled up in such a way that we can't understand that we see them and I was like
no way you know like I know that there are three dimensions I'm a good three dimensional
thinker maybe four but this is crap you know and the first time I met so the colleague
at the Broad who invited me he said well you can think of dimensionality in a different
way you can think of information and so we choose to chart space on three axes a point
in space with three axes but if you want to chart its temperature you can add an axis
and if you want to chart its fuzziness you can add an axis and its color you can add
an axis and all of a sudden it kind of blew my mind that this was a new tool it wasn't
a I mean perhaps it's a sense that it was a set of goggles right it was a story that
allowed me to look at the world very differently however I also brought my you know I'm a highly
trained visual thinker and I brought my tools and I was not so much interested in just learning
from scientists although that had a huge part but I was also I had the kind of hubris to
think that I could also contribute to the discussion and help them make better science
that it would be a two-way street and so you know on the base level people talk a lot
about the genome as a series of four letters right and it's very powerful because you can
reduce this highly complex framework or this highly complex reality to something for which
we have lots of tools right we've spent thousands of years analyzing texts and doing numerology
so we can manipulate this Bible with a high level of sophistication and but as you do that
you forget that they're not letters right and it's not that that they represent other
things and that they exist in three-dimensional space with electric potentials and etc etc
etc and so you know I listened to this ACTG thing and I went well so you're you're using
you know the idea that genes is sort of like a verb right it's sort of a word and at the
time people talked a lot about junk DNA right so there was these sequences of code that were
like words that were genes and there was all this shit and in between them that was junk
because it wasn't doing anything that we could tell as a visual artist I know that the negative
space of things is essential to the thingness of things right so you know the first thing
you know I learned in art classes was to a person who draws this is our universe right
and anywhere you touch the universe you change the whole thing and so as I draw a cup I know
that it's operating and it's changing the whole thing if I draw the outline or and so I was
like I don't believe that that's junk you know and it's not my saying that that changed
the fact that people realize that junk DNA isn't junk but I was able to kind of critically
intuit that that there was information there because it was it's a representation space
and that's one of the things that artists bring to science basically is just an example
you gave up precisely different kind of goggles okay example I mean the goggles not have to
be colored or sound or it can be ideas and you happen to have an abstracted abstraction
a bend for abstraction which is wonderful one could be inspired by a mathematical ideas
and as a which is a good example of we share those thoughts we give each other goggles and
part of the part of the richness I think of the of transdisciplinary work is that and
there's reasons for this I think that we increase the point the points of view on set
on problem sets and we enrich them and that that echoes in our culture at the moment that
we're thinking and for lots of different reasons high dimensionally we're thinking in terms
of polypiliphanies we're thinking in terms of these integrative social systems and we
need non domain specific ways of addressing them so what if the residency had not been
in like a science context what if it was a neutral space with microscopes technologies
and all of these things were disconnected from art and science and again I go back to
for example the dooders stat center which is like part of the University of Michigan
I quote that because I'm I had taught there for eight years and the dooders stat center
is completely agnostic run by the provost serves everyone and open 24 seven but taking
people out of the equation and they have and they have virtual reality caves they have
three hundred and sixty degrees stereoscopic screens they have five hundred independent
workstations for the experimentation with digital technology and you will be in there
at three o'clock in the morning and the person to your left is is from biology the person
to your right is from naval architecture and marine engineering the person behind you
is from school of medicine person over there is from arts and sciences right how does this
shift the way that we think about that connective tissue between us and I realize I'm putting
out a thought experiment how do we imagine this would shift the conversation because
I've done residencies in scientific context as well and they're wonderful and this isn't
in any way of criticism of that but I'm wondering if if imagining this other space would provide
us with an opportunity to ask a different set of questions I was just thinking about
the idea of space because I curate a speaker series in Brooklyn called the empiricist
league and what what we do is we get scientists and researchers and journalists to get on stage
the same stage the comedians and musicians and people of a different sort of skill set
get on stage and talk about their work you know in 15 for 15 minutes and I think you
know I've also been in the position where I've gone to as an artist gone to a conference
where I didn't understand the jargon but I immersed myself in it this is because I was
involved in this I'm involved in the synthetic biology community and I think that it takes
it's a lot of effort as an artist to be immersed into a field science field of science like
that because you have to you have to take in what's been said and be patient with yourself
and understand that you'll you'll the jargon will become more familiar in time and then
you have conversations with people and you and you kind of compare your your jargon your
mutual jargon and see if you can find overlap so it's it's an interesting process as an
artist to be so closely intertwined with with a scientist you know I experienced this when
I was working on the synthetic biology curriculum with Natalie Kildel and the amazing team that
I worked on it with just kind of being quiet and listening to ideas come up and take notes
and then the next time you have the conversation with them you understand a little bit more
and you can you can and you had said something about about observation and I think that translation
is a part of that as well as an artist like you're you observe what's happening you observe
a process you you question it you think about how it's depicted visually because it is
like a symbol and then you translate it into a piece of work or a graph or a diagram or
or yeah just something that somebody else can build off of so yeah I want I wanted to come
back to this idea of tools because I think that you know we've been talking a lot about
the emphasis of you know kind of repurposing tools and using these tools in different settings
and neutral settings that the way I often think about you know accessing and infiltrating these
spaces or conferences is is also thinking a little bit more in my case and you know I
have kind of a distorted world where a lot of my films are about animals and the way I
kind of infiltrate these conferences is by kind of this anthropomorphic kind of entrance
into these world so I made a my first film was about fruit flies because I spent 10 years
with them they were kind of my my friends I spent 10 most of the time looking at fruit
flies and imagining that I was kind of like a calf they ask like human size fly so I'll
spare you guys with with those dreams they they appear in some of my movies but but the
way I was able to access there was two ways one was through kind of taking a subject matter
I'm very interested in this idea of animals as subject matters in which you can you know
you can create a film that has a kind of a merge of scientific information as well as
kind of like a fictional representation and you can access these conferences you know like
the dress off of conferences that that attract thousands and thousands of people all around
the world and I find that you know there's a lot about the synthesis of the tools but
the way the way I kind of get into these worlds is through these model organisms or through
the actual participants in this case scientists which I invite scientists to be involved in
fictional films so Stuart I think who has spoken or will speak Stuart Fierstein plays a 1920s
professor of he plays Thomas Hunt Morgan in the 1920s lab at Columbia but I and then I
had Leslie Vochal who works on smell play a scientist in the 20s but by involving these
scientists in art projects where they're not only passive advisors but are actually involved
in the making of this project even though there's a bit of resistance initially I find
that I can access you know it's the same way as when you make a film and you want to get
you know this actor will I try to get these scientists that are kind of the experts in
their field to put them in a in a kind of leave their comfort zone and put them in these
settings where they may be talking about their work but they may also be in a fictionalized
setting so think this idea of tools is very important but the tools are evolving and incredible
speed and I feel that the tools will eventually it's you know it's like when you go to film
school and they teach you about the latest cameras but ultimately all of this will change
and and evolve so I think it's important to think about how the tools will enable these
kind of ideas or whether it's also like a mathematical equation or an animal or and I find that
for me the all the scientific jargon that you were mentioning I find that there's a lot
of ways of making parallels between these you know these kind of very abstract ideas
and and make these parallels between the lives of scientists and you know what does it mean
to study the genes that dictate color in a in a butterfly wing and how does that relate
to to a person so I oftentimes transpose or translate these ideas or these equations into
people's lives and and kind of find these relationships between between micro and macro
so I think just to like put this out on the floor I think that you know we think a lot
about tools and we think a lot about DIY spaces that have PCR machines and you know all these
tools but I think ultimately it's you know over the last hundreds of years it's it is
this idea that that kind of motivates these collaborations and so I like that you've
inverted the normal model and you're inviting scientists into an artistic space I think
like maybe also in response to your observations like I would like to see more of that like
what would it mean to have a scientist in residence at a museum or an art or an engineer
in residence in an art context and I think all in college came up once in a in the prior
panel but there's a really wonderful professor there Sarah Hendren who is launching this so
they recently have got some funding to do engineering placements into art engine art
organizations for their students so yeah I mean that's that's a great methodology you
don't do genetics anymore no I don't I mean I dabble in science when I work in a film because
I get to actually come back and shadow scientists and work in those environments and and I will
say that back to your point it is hard to access these worlds and being a geneticist has helped
me but was it doesn't the other way around yeah it's a question I ask myself often is
whether if I have inverted kind of the experience and my background in terms of studying film
and I think that yeah it's a question that I that is a fundamental question I think you're
touching on which I think is to be interesting we all agree that there's a fundamental relationship
between science and and and art I mean aesthetics deals with beauty perception beauty science
deals with truth since Plato to hide a group people talk about truth and beauty being the
same or fundamentally related so we all agree on that the fact that we are here believing
it and we're talking about the fact that how science can and those goggles and those equations
can inspire artists but now both of you open up like turn the table almost and ask it begs
asking fundamental question can art fundamentally enhance science fundamental science it's a
it's not clear to me by the way I mean of course as an artist as a scientist I as a who
loves art yeah no but I'm not sure I'm not totally sure how as a scientist and perception
of of course on a fundamental level there is a looking for simple ideas simple equations
must perceive beauty in simplicity as a whole movement in physics trying to unify things
down to simple single equation possibly and as it people question whether there is such
a thing or with such a funneling down to a single equation is indeed a true a true fundamental
thing to do or an affection of our aesthetic tendencies but my question the question we
would like to put forward is to what extent art can inspire science I think that the first
thing to think about before we you know even address that the question is we first have
to kind of demystify this idea that science is objective and science is you know it's
always about striving for accuracy and I think you know when I approach any type of collaboration
I'd love to mix to kind of work in this middle ground between what is real and what is unreal
and so I think you know what's important is to understand that there's a lot of subjectivity
there's a lot of interpretation and you know and creating narratives when you're publishing
papers that shouldn't necessarily pollute or misconstrue the facts I think you know it
actually enhances it in many ways and I think that is how I think arts art can really help
the scientists is to think about you know how do we use these tools and repurpose them
or how do we think about these questions in different ways you know I have the story where
when I was working on this film about fruit flies I created a by thorax fly that has four
wings and I had many labs in New York that were involved in trying to generate this fly
I had to be in these 18 degree chambers and it's very hard to make because they can't
get out of the pupa and then suddenly we were shooting we were maybe like in the first week
of shooting and somebody told us at Rockefeller that they had this by thorax fly so we went
over to the lab we brought it in a petri dish and a taxi was like escorted and then we brought
it on set we had like these huge cameras and ready to shoot and it lived maybe for a minute
more but when I made the film I had all these scientists that asked me how I generated this
fly so I thought that the film had actually contributed because there was actually no video
of this four wing fly only these images that were made by Ed Lewis and a long time ago but
but anyway this is a case where the film actually gave people ideas about trying to generate
this fly but I think yeah just a side note there I think that you know inherently artists
are there also to kind of show the scientists that the information that they have the facts
that they have they can be used in other ways there's a bit of a danger in what you first
I completely agree with you scientists are full of the biases there could be somewhere
on the on the spectrum of aesthetically minded or not and but we are all at our biases it's
projected in our work but we teach our graduate students when the writer paper they see something
not to tell it because in the making some more beautiful or more aesthetic or more poetic
the other way around of course you all fail to some extent but there's a danger in trying
to inject statuses in the practice of science scientists will recall that we are taught to
recall at it so it's a I'm not saying it's a bad thing the experiment can be wonderful
can be you know although the way we learn is through narrative the way the way I think
aesthetics I agree with you is is is a tricky line but the way we ingest information is
by telling stories inherently whether it's facts you know whether it's experiments that
we did in a chronological fashion or we you know we did experiments over six years but
then we streamline into this paper then so you're inviting the physicists to tell story
artistically in the physical review letters or no not artistically but you have to tell
a story in order to present your data but also powers of observation are very different
between artists I mean I was just a Roger Molina's watering hole a couple of weeks ago
at UT Dallas and there was someone there Patrice Legal who is working with an artist and they
set up these large fluid tanks and he's a works in fluid dynamics and they worked I believe
I could be forgive me if this isn't entirely accurate but as I understand it this pool
was tipping back and forth and they were photographing waves with a very high speed camera and
through the observation of first of all through the setup and through the observation of
these waves they discovered that certain parts of the wave formation itself are still on
the surface of the water this is scientific discovery this is completely new scientific
discovery so I think there are depending on the setup and the lens through which you observe
phenomena I think this is something that artists bring to the table that it can be quite different
and another example former colleague of mine when we were working with particle and theoretical
physicists ended up using the math from physics to visualize a botan and it was a different
interpretation of the math but the math was correct and he brought this back to the physicists
the physicists said holy cow the math is right but we never thought that it could turn into
a form that looked like this this went back and fundamentally changed the research that
was occurring in that physics lab so I think there are occasions where the kind of interpretive
lens through which an artist will look at mathematics and the ways in which an artist will actually
observe phenomena can actually bring something quite unique to the table so I have a question
for all of you and this is something I've been wondering about a lot of science art collaborations
maybe 98% of them are started by artists scientists usually agree in the end yeah that was great
I enjoyed that and maybe it added to their work maybe it revealed something about their
work maybe they just liked it because it was fun we need the dating service right but my
question is does anybody have a problem with the fact that that's true that this world
is pretty much artist initiated is that problematic or not I don't really know if I haven't really
necessarily found that to be true just because like as an artist I guess one of the biggest
projects that I worked on was like I said the curriculum and I ended up working on that
because the scientists asked me to because I made like a like an artifact I made a diagram
that explained a process and she saw it was like this makes sense to me I think that this
would be great for the book and we can apply this to how we teach it you know and so I didn't
actually actively seek out the collaboration with her I just made something and said here
look at it you know and was open to corrections and criticisms but I want to talk about something
really quickly about the notion of story because even within like the world of art and the
world of science story can be jargony because I mean I worked in the marketing and advertising
world and and they would they would just harp on the idea of story story story story story
and and what when I think of story from that perspective it's like a crafted narrative
that leads you to a specific outcome which is you know to a purchase that's what it is
and so but but when you're talking about science in term I mean I'm sorry story in terms of
science you're looking at data and you're seeing what patterns emerged from the data
you know and maybe you have an idea of what story you'd like to tell but I mean at least
this is experience that I had when I was working with you know another collaborator who's a
scientist and she was like I'm looking for the story I'm like what do you mean we have
the story it's like how do you know artists and scientists think alike or not not alike
you know and she's like no I mean like the story like the minutiae the details like the
patterns and I'm like oh story so yeah I mean still I think Judas point is still not a two
way street this mostly these things are initiated by artists perhaps one way to get the balance
off from 98% or so to maybe 90% is to encourage scientists I know in my inner to do art my
university has a competition every year scientists are encouraged to make a picture or graphic
and submit it and is it the art of science this is right called the art of science okay
and and I've contributed to it I lost but I have no colleagues who want and we take it
seriously so we all become an artist for a week and and so there could be things like
this done at you know what my residencies are wonderful places to practice these things
in my case it was the other way around I think for a long time maybe that was true I think
we're we're in an emergent space it may be we tired of using that word but things are
changing very fast and and there are more and more institutions that are trying to understand
what's happening in the street sort of sort of so to speak and that are trying to support
it I was really fortunate to be the past two years in a conference organized by the National
Academy called NACFI National Academy's
which is originally a science based interdisciplinary conference and two years ago they started inviting
artists and designers and I know Roger was there Roger Molina was there and I think more and more
these things are happening all over the place and and all sorts of different forms and I think
one of the focus is shifting a little bit to okay well now we know that this is possible and
and maybe now we can start tackling problems and I kind of wanted to come back to what Stuart had
said you know we've found ways of interrogate we all interrogate the world and we're starting to
see our relationship with it we've found out some things about our relationship to and effects on
the world that are problematic I mean I'm adding now that are problematic and that we we're going
to need to address and I think a lot of our motivations come from different kinds of sense of sense of
urgency about what we can or could do in our siloed activity spaces and what we might be able to do
by pooling efforts and points of view and I think there's so for example in the case of NACFI last
year we came up with this idea this question does the ocean have memory and it's a silly question
right of course the ocean doesn't have memory well wait a minute you know and so what's what's nice
is that NACFI also has grants that follow the conference so we applied for Sea Grants and we're
able to bring together 20 20 researchers from across oceanography the humanities and the arts to play
and pose this question and we're kind of iterating this now and it turns out that there's a lot of
fruitful ways to pose that question and just in the articulation of the words and then in the
articulations of our disciplines and so that would set off a different series of narratives for each
of the it sets out an echo chamber and ultimately what we're talking about is shifting and I guess
that was one of the things I wanted to talk about before we leave it it or before we just open it
to questions was we're in a space where we're starting to wonder about caring right and a few years ago
there was a our chance conference at MIT and Bruno Latul was one of the speaker the keynote and he said
you know the science is in about global warming the real question is why don't we care you know and
I'm going to be working from now on this was Bruno speaking about why we don't care about Gaia and
I was kind of blown away by you know there's I think to some degree without trying to save the world
we're all wondering about that question what can I do right now and the reason that we're reaching
beyond our disciplines has something to do with that is that the solution obviously we're this
we're the cause of the problem so if we don't start acting differently and starting to find ways to
care for this planet that we live on we're toast you know absolutely and I mean I talk to a lot of
ecologists because a lot of my work involves you know environmental research and intervention and
I think that's a field actually where there's a huge amount of interest and work happening
inviting artists and designers into research projects because of this because you know this
the those fields have struggled to get engagement and you know public discussion happening around
the findings and these very urgent problems that we all face and I'm both excited and terrified when
the discourse changes and all of a sudden the artists are going to come in and solve that problem
right but yeah I think perhaps this isn't there's not so much of an agenda to do this in physics
but definitely like in environment and ecology there is but I guess part of what that represents
is we're actually coming out of it we're not going into just into another I'm it's not just about
going into the lab or coming into the street it's actually going into our common street or whatever
we want to call it our common world and saying well we need to collaborate on this and it's no
longer about just doing art about science or science about art I can see how the environment
is a perfect environment for it but what would be another another discipline that would that would
have such a fraternity for I mean I think because of the way that science is taught it's so hard to
see outside of these dominant Western narratives that we all just live and breathe because that's
the way we're taught from literally like kindergarten right so an example that I've been talking about
a lot with some friends is recent apparently in the field of ecology they think that the way that
birds evolved to have wings wasn't anything about them trying getting like developing modes of
transport but it was about an interface for attracting mates right so that the birds would
perform and the wings get larger and it's about doing get attracting your whatever you know your
partner and so I think this like this idea of affective ecology the narratives of ecology we
think about it in a very functional sense right so you know wings were developed because you know
organisms want to get around better or that there's an advantage to doing that or you know when an
organism is moving around it's looking for food and we we have this super anthropomorphic
perspective on the way that we understand all systems and so I think understanding that affect
is something that isn't also exclusively human is obviously something that the arts is really
well versed in and can completely then change narratives of how we understand the natural world
that aren't necessarily in like traditional you know scientific I think those narratives are
really important Ursula Heiser at the Sustainability Institute at UCLA as an echo critic and she's
highly highly critical of the kinds of narratives that we're spinning around ecology today and
says that they're highly problematic and we have to think of entirely new narratives to actually
budge people forward and to think about futures with these changed environments that we're we're
soon to encounter but back to that idea of the narratives one word that hasn't come into this
conversation yet and I'd like to throw it out there is the word empathy because I teach in medical
humanities I'm the director of the Graduate School of Art at Washington University in St. Louis and
I've gotten some terrific grants to put together art science fellows groups one of them from the
Scandalera Center for Entrepreneurship because I managed to convince them that the bringing
together of artists scientists and humanists was in and of itself an entrepreneurial venture and
I got a nice big grant that culminated with this symposium at UCLA but the um in teaching
predominantly pre-med students and showing them again focusing not on the aesthetic qualities of
the work as much as I'm focusing on the kinds of discourses that the work attaches itself to using
medical practice contemporary medical practices both subject and object how is it that artists
then extend or expand upon conversations about the AIDS pandemic or about disease and healing
or about redesigning the human it's it's really changing the ways in which people going through
medicine training for to become either researchers or to go into clinical practice are really thinking
about their practice and we know that there's significant data that states that empathy is
extremely important for positive clinical outcomes and yet the average student who goes through
medical school over time loses empathy so they come in with a very high level of empathy and by
the time they graduate from medical school they have virtually none and I think increasingly more and
more universities are requiring of their medical students to take medical humanities courses this
has been one of the richest experiences I'm co-teaching with wonderful science historian Rebecca Mesparger
cultural historian and I'm just wondering you know the one word that I keep coming back to in this
course that I think I'm passing on to the men's students' empathy and I'm wondering if anybody
has I think by throwing that word out you didn't indeed open up my eyes to an answer to the question
I posed artists are better equipped in general of course to be they are humanist in the sense
that much more so on the average than scientists so how many scientists can build can build a nuclear bomb
now imagine how dangerous if a scientist who can who can build nuclear bomb and never had a poem
so there is this ethical dimension that the artist is on on the average better equipped to bring
into into this and all so I think that you touched on a very important point one thing that arts can
offer in detail science is this humanist view of the world that sometimes scientists can get
locked in locked out of I'm really glad that you brought up the the connect between art and medicine
because there's a lot of literature being published about that right now and I think it's we were
talking about you know where the ripe territories for the stuff that's definitely one place so we
want to open it up to the audience for questions now you know the drill the lineup and uh yeah we
have let's see we have about 20 minutes for questions I I have to make that point that I have done art
that is actually science research and I discovered working with liquid formations that the physics
of liquid formation correlate to biological formation processes and a prime example of my findings is
that I discovered the formation process of the vertebrae I mean I can I don't know maybe can put
it out on the desk afterwards what do you think yes you throw it on the desk but if you have a
question for this panel we would love to hear it let me just finish okay but so what's shown
in what's also shown in ps1 one of those liquid formation vertebrae is in a collection of the
national gallery in Austria and other example of my findings is that I adrift green paint into
red gesso and this mouse formation came out science research um worship crab another paint splash
Stefan these might be better to look at up close don't you think okay and let me just say one more thing
um anyway spray can markings organisms I put them out there and they'll be out there when you want
to talk okay but also my my website other dimension website deals with other dimension reality and
that is also research on the facts of other dimensions thank you can I can I say something
um I just want to mention because we're talking a lot about art practices and we have this
initiative at Evagion Science which some of the people in the audience have participated where
we're very interested in unpublished data and very interested in data that kind of sits on
computers especially video obviously because we and we try to um just it was just kind of inspired
by by these presentations these these images that we encourage scientists to actually give us their
data and present it in kind of a cinematic setting and I think that has been an amazing way of
getting scientists to feel that their research is being interpreted in a different way um and
having them actually be there and also talk about the data and we try not to over narrate or over
kind of explain what the data is we just show it as if it was kind of like an experimental film
from the from the 20s or something um you know like where they used to show like the Percy Smith
and the acrobatic fly or the mites on cheese or these types of things and um and we have this
other competition back because I wanted to talk his film I feel it's also the relationship every
art practices has a different way of thinking about it but we get a lot of scientists that are very
enthusiastic about participating in film and when we do this collaboration at Imagine Science
called symbiosis where we get scientists and filmmakers to collaborate usually the scientists
are you know I mean I don't want to generalize but they tend to be the most enthusiastic they tend
to open the labs and and be very open to these kind of collaboration so I've I found that if you have
the right setting and the right organizations these kind of closeted scientists that feel that maybe
some of their work is not meant to be used in other ways they just it opens it up and then we we
almost get them to be so excited that they want to still continue working and you know Andres here
he was part of that symbiosis competition and um and we have this event called the lab meeting where
midway through their the making of these films they talk about the the process of it so I find
that scientists actually they re-inject in the art community this kind of sense of of kind of new
wave and excitement where sometimes artists and again I'm generalizing may have a little bit more
of a blazae or kind of in scientists they just they get really excited and I always prefer to show
my films to scientists people and people in film festivals is a very like a very specific environment
where there's just a lot of pretentious whereas with scientists you just get like these inherent
excitement about about your point about taking data and information out of a context and put
another context can be really enriching and artistic in conferences or you can go if even if you are
a specialist you go to a session where you could be completely gibberish okay right and especially
if a life scientist goes into a physical scientist or vice versa and that will happen to me many times
and I see I sit in the back of the room and I look at the view graphs and the view graphs become
because that is disconnected from their context right completely visual right and it can be gorgeous
I mean it can be absolutely beautiful to look at and I think this is a great exercise to take real
data plots actually my my office is decorated with plots which are gibberish to most everybody else
but they are I presume they are beautiful to some extent but I think what you're doing is a
wonderful thing was to take things out of context and let the visual parts speak
yeah thank you we're going to take the next question now that's actually a good question
my name is Anna Fine-Pour and you'll see my artwork later this evening and I'm really happy to be
here I've been working in scientific concepts not solely but it interests me and recently I was at
a event at National Academy of Sciences Alana's here but it wasn't her event and it was about gene
editing and my next project is for an exhibition at NIH about transposons and how they're expressed
in tulips and I found out that the tulip genome hasn't been sequenced so I asked this woman who
works on rare diseases you know I said you know why hasn't the tulip genome been sequenced nobody
can explain to me why except that it's very expensive and she said well you know it would be really big
and we'd have to understand it and I said no I don't have to understand it and so my question is how
with all of these issues there's not all scientists obviously but too many of them this idea that I
would say I don't have to understand it is very foreign to them and after the event there was
you know time to socialize and people came up to me and thanked me for putting it out there like
that so it's very much like I just want the visualization to use it as for collage I don't have to understand
how you got to that point so I think that's a really important issue for the scientists to
understand that we don't artists don't have to understand it but they don't always understand it
either yeah exactly thank you
I'm Dr. Shirley mother I am a physician I wanted to add some balance to the empathy issue I think
this was someone from the University of Chicago and he showed yes then medical students that when
they start they have a lot of empathy and at the end of their training they don't and then he went
into the positives and negatives of this and although it is true that having some empathy is a good
thing I think for a physician to have way too much empathy is a bad thing I mean that is part of the
beauty of becoming a doctor is to become objective about the patient for example I could never treat
my family it would be a disaster but I can treat people I don't know so like everything you know
how the whole world goes like this you know at one time one thing is good and that it isn't then
it's good again I think with the empathy issue that's kind of the same thing balance is the most
important thing not that you didn't say that but it's important to realize it right I'm having co
teaching with people from radiology for you know about 15 years or so and I was astounded to learn
from the people that I knew at the universities that I had taught at that there was even only half
a day of ethics training that went into me so there's you know we get a lot of students coming
back and sitting in on our class and saying oh my god I wish we'd have had this course when we were
going through med school so you write it's it's I certainly understand the importance of being able
to make an objective decision in the delivery of medical assistance of any kind but they're you
know certainly for the students who are sort of taking the course and coming back a few years later
it seems to really be helping them so we'll see how it all balances out in 10 years yeah thank you
for your comments especially in surgery it's hard to have a lot of empathy you're going to slice into
somebody that's that's where anesthesiology comes into place right yeah hi first of all thank you to
everybody who's been on these round tables today and everyone who's asked questions I've really
enjoyed the day so far my name is Kate Saint-Ammon I'm the courtistic director of a New York based
dance company and for the past few years we've been digging into this intersection of science and art
we ended up creating an evening length work that Happy to Report Promure to New York went very well
and Edgar you mentioned about bringing art to like for example an APS conference and we did we
just did exactly that last month we took the whole company to the New England chapter University
over at Rhode Island to the APS conference and it was amazing what did you guys do we performed
our entire work for the conference and so we went to some of their conference and most of them came
to see the performance and we all spoke after so which kind of leads to my question which Daniel
I think you were starting to touch on we've done a few other examples of that but it just directly
correlated to what he said so that was one performance through which we performed the dance and engaged
with to us a new audience and what we're coming to a lot is you know I think what you do is amazing
I think what you do is amazing and that's great that we both know it's really important that what
we're talking about and doing and you know it's important but it's almost like what what do we do
some what do we do next or and you were talking about kind of bringing this to a more world
discussion and I don't know I'd be curious to hear you speak a little bit more about like what do we
do next or what can we do because there is a sense that it's important that we're talking and
figuring stuff out and having these conversations but sometimes it's good to hear a new perspective
of why like why it feels so important why do you think it's important I think I could
I could keep listening to all of you say all of these things that are exactly and I think in the
last discussion art can sometimes embody something that we can't say and it can be ugly and beautiful
and confusing and intelligent all at the same time so for me corn and mechanics just sparked
something in me very specific and I I knocked on a lot of doors along the way because I am in no way
as scientists so it can say anything nothing and everything I don't want to get too far into my
personal experience but I feel that it's important and I feel that I learned something after every
conversation or every performance that I didn't know before and that's what I hear happens after
people are watching what we're doing so I don't know maybe I'm just seeking more words to quantify
that as we continue to grow our work. Last year at the Space in Between Conference Ellen
Levy who's sitting over there talked about attention and how her work was shifting to attention and
to look at attention there's some really great examples and questions that she asked but for me
that was really transformative and I think we're starting to pay attention you know like we we
are feeling a need to pay attention and it's very hard to pay attention I mean we could go into
discussion about evolutionary behaviors and stuff like that but if you're in the environment that
you're in always the same it you're you pay attention differently and as you start to reach out and
to be in a place where you don't quite know the rules or something will come up and you have never
seen it before oh my god you know you pay attention and so I think there's something in this space
that we're exploring which is allowing us to pay attention and we we know that it's urgent that we
do it so I think we all have different things that we're starting to pay attention to you know
places that we turn to for that sense of surprise in my practice in my just before I started working
with scientists I always move my paintings around in the studio because every time they're on a new
wall in the new light I see them differently and I can repaint them or I can find find clues to
how to continue them and I think there's something I mean I really think there's something happening
across our cultures where and whatever I have a whole you know theoretical framework around it
I won't bore you with it but I think there are some very profound changes that happened at the end
of the 19th century that put us into a new sets of causalities and where it's unfolding and at the
same time we're faced partly because we can see it because of those changes that happened we're
faced with these sort of mounting deadlines and so I think those two things together are making us
notice stop and notice and I think there's a real reason for it and you know that's what I think
that's why we're all in this room in some way because we stopped and we're noticing we're
wondering how to move from here you mentioned that you just want to add one thing to what you said
you mentioned that art has been described as conference as a certain mechanics press things
are beautiful ugly and confusing and then you mentioned that you're curious about quantum mechanics
as someone who teaches quantum mechanics can tell you you pick the right field because it's
it is it is really it can be very beautiful it can be the questions can get very ugly and
it's very confusing and the more the more you dig into it the more confusing it is so as an artist
you cannot have picked a better branch of physics
Hello hi my name is Leona I'm a laser accelerator student at
Goran's Berkeley Labs and I've been thinking about a lot of these questions a lot actually and
I think if you asked Einstein if his work with his violin was crucial he would say yes and for me
I have been I have a favorite author it's Jules Byrne and I don't research in exactly that field but
his work inspires me I've thought about this question of whether art is actually necessary
for scientists to be scientific not just whether art can inspire science and I don't have an answer
to that I'd like to think yes but I also know a lot of scientists who don't know anything about art
and seem to be pretty good scientists so anyway if you could address that would be great
I just wanted to mention two conferences that I don't know how many of you know about that do
bring science and art together and they have art galleries and presentations by artists and they
have workshops at each of these one is called bridges which is an art and mathematics conference
and they have you know a day for families and children and play and so we're talking about
what can happen at these conferences they're a good example and the other one is it started out
as a society for literature and science and has become society for literature science and the arts
and so the kind of work you're talking about has been going on at these conferences for a very
long time and I recommend recommend them to anybody who wants to see how to keep going with this kind
of thing. Thank you yeah those are both really really great conferences I'm sure some of you in
the room have been there. At the risk of sounding like I'm just plugging an organization but it's a
good one for anybody who's interested in arts integration in general as the Alliance for the
Arts and the Research Institutions because they're looking at not only how art sort of permeates
and integrates across campus but how the other you know and again it's the more difficult part
of the conversation how are other you know disciplines coming to the arts but there's one
kind of branch or node of the research task force the National Research Task Force is called the
third tier aggregator that's looking to establish a research platform and also a kind of committee
of 100 people who will be qualified to assess transdisciplinary work and if we can get more people
able to navigate the tenure system who are doing this kind of work it will fundamentally change
the kinds of spaces that open up you know on university campuses the more sort of joint
appointments you get the more that we can assess this kind of work that's happening in this space
between and this is one group run by Kevin Hamilton and at Champaign Urbana and also
Dara Burnet Carnegie Mellon University they've been working very hard to sort of establish
this and it could again it could it could fundamentally change the way that research universities
where to have art programs are functioning and science of course is deeply embedded in
in all of these conversations so yeah yeah well actually since we have yeah you touched on a very
important point creating academic positions in such a field just a field I think if I hear you
right you are exactly doing your faculty going through that process is this something that you
think is difficult are you facing difficulties or facing resistance from traditional academic
attitude towards merging to in in practicing as an academic?
Or not necessarily are you in your institution but in general?
Well I mean I'm very lucky at the moment in that the engineering school in YU is very unusual
because it used to be Brooklyn Polytech and so we have an SDS department we have a digital media
department within the engineering school which is like almost unheard of anywhere else but
it means that like within the school itself there is this interdisciplinarity which I
did not experience in the other institutions I've been in I mean I think in the context of art
design there's a lot of opportunities for for people who are doing more interdisciplinary work
particularly people who are engaging with you know computation media arts as technology is sort of
and computation is seeping into all aspects of our lives I think there's an sort of an awareness
and an agenda for including that more centrally within an institutional context but I also think
and this relates to the STEAM panel that was earlier that the way that engineering and science
are taught excludes a huge amount of the population I mean if we look at who's in this room like we're
not exactly a hugely diverse bunch in here right why is that and like coming through an engineering
degree where literally at the start of every subject the professor would be like oh well 60%
of people failed last year so you better work really hard you know and it's like well that's
why we face these diversity issues in the Silicon Valley and in the lots of the sort of institutions
where we work we have the privilege of working and so I think for me one thing so I teach computer
science but through an art pedagogy so prompts assignments the work we do is open-ended it's about
personal expression it's not about you know working through problem sets as a traditional
computer science I'm gonna put a course up there unfortunately but all I was gonna say is that that
means that a different community of people feel invited and feel able to participate yes and that's
a really important part of the game and kind of could I excuse could I just make one more point we
do have to cut off okay the invitation to why don't we show up at more scientific conferences the
12 scientific conferences the artist that I know cannot afford the registration yeah so
these conferences would put aside a registration or a free registration for an invite an art
that would help to me absolutely okay everyone um thank you conversations to be continued absolutely
thank you round table thank you so much is Jamie McCray in the room are you somewhere where are
you okay we are having an artistic interlude so if you want to do that fun thing of turning around
in your chair and facing the projector we're gonna watch some science based dance right now